# Shadow value analysis in continuous time models: Pontryagin's maximum principle

[toc]

## 1. Introduction

Analyzing shadow values is a key method for understanding channels in dynamic economic models. In discrete-time models, this is typically done by first solving the policy function and then applying the envelope theorem to the first-order conditions of the Bellman equation’s Lagrangian. This process, especially in the presence of incomplete markets, often involves managing the complex expectation terms about the future. In contrast, continuous-time modeling offers significant analytical advantages by algebraically eliminating the future expectation term. Given this, one might expect similar ease in analyzing shadow values in continuous-time models. However, the techniques required differ. Pontryagin’s maximum principle has been the most powerful tool for addressing stochastic optimal control problems in this context.

In this blog post, I firstly set up the notation for the strong formulation of stochastic control which applies to a wide class of economic models. Then, I give the statement of the corresponding maximum principle which, in addition to policy functions, gives how to derive the SDE of shadow values. Finally, I compare a couple of simple models in discrete time and continuous time to illustrate how to transfer from discrete time analysis to continuous time.

This blog post is based on Chapter 3 in the great book: *Stochastic Controls: Hamiltonian Systems and HJB Equations* by Jiongmin Yong and Xu You Zhou (2012). Personally speaking, this book is the best textbook I've ever seen on this topic which develops the whole theory in a sound and self-contained style. Readers who are interested in developing tractable continuous time models are highly recommended to check this book.

## 2. Stochastic control: strong formulation

In this post, let's consider the continuous time counterpart of the following infinite-horizon stochastic problem:
$$
\max_{ \{c_t \in\mathcal{C}_t \}_{t=0}^\infty } \mathbb{E}_0 \sum_{t=0}^\infty \beta^t U(x_t,c_t)
$$
Where $c_t$ is a vector of control variables; $x_t$ is the vector of state variables. This formulation covers a large class of economic models. 


















## Reference

1. Yong, J., & Zhou, X. Y. (2012). *Stochastic controls: Hamiltonian systems and HJB equations* (Vol. 43). Springer Science & Business Media.