# A 15 min tutorial for Adaptive Sparse Grid (ASG)

[toc]

## Introduction

The curse of dimensionality makes it difficult for economists to model complex economic dynamics. For example, a five-state discrete-time lifecycle model might require millions of grid points, with higher-dimensional problems becoming infeasible due to time and memory constraints. In recent decades, numerical methods have been developed to address this issue. Sparse grids, an extension of standard interpolation theory, offer a natural transition to high-dimensional modeling.

Recent advances in sparse grid theory introduce adaptation, where nodes are added or removed based on the local function shape, further reducing the required number of interpolation nodes compared to regular sparse grids (RSG). This *adaptive sparse grid* (ASG) technique is particularly useful in economic research, where value functions often exhibit power law behaviors.

This blog post introduces ASG and its basic algorithm, aiming to help a broad audience quickly engage with the literature and apply this method to their work.

## Where do we need ASG?

In general, ASG works in all scenarios wherever an interpolation or function approximation is needed. Some typical scenarios are:

- Lifetime optimization problems, both discrete time and continuous time
- High-dimensional non-parametric estimation
- Numerical quadrature and other exercises

## General idea

Let’s start from the standard interpolation theory. In this post, we discuss single-valued real functions $f(x):\mathbb{R}^m\to\mathbb{R}$. An interpolant is a function defined by a collection of basis function $\phi_j:\mathbb{R}^{m}\to\mathbb{R}$ and a collection of interpolation coefficients $c_j\in\mathbb{R}$ in which $n$ is the degree of interpolation.
$$
f(x) \approx \hat{f}(x) := \sum_{j=1}^{n} \phi_j (x) \cdot c_j
$$
Different interpolation methods differ from the design of $\phi_j$ but share the same structure as above. For example:

- **Global interpolation**
    - **(Global) polynomial interpolation**
    - **Spectral method**
    - **(Global) spline**
    
- **Local interpolation**
- **Piecewise polynomial interpolation**
    
- **Spline**

We don’t discuss these specific methods but focus on multi-dimensional *piecewise linear interpolation* (aka multi-linear interpolation). Readers may refer to the textbooks of numerical analysis for the details of other methods. The piecewise 











## Reference

1. ddd